Task 4 Report: Setup and Use a Firewall on Windows 

Objective 
Configure and test basic firewall rules to allow or block traffic on Windows. 

Tools Used 
Windows Defender Firewall with Advanced Security 

Steps and Documentation 

1. Open Firewall Configuration Tool 
Press Win + R, type firewall.cpl, and press Enter. 
Click Advanced settings on the left to open "Windows Defender Firewall with Advanced 
Security". 

2. List Current Firewall Rules 
In the left pane, select Inbound Rules to view existing rules. 

3. Add Rule to Block Inbound Traffic on Port 23 (Telnet) 
In Inbound Rules, click New Rule... in the right pane. 
Select Port, click Next. 
Choose TCP, enter 23 as the specific port. 
Click Next, select Block the connection, then Next. 
Ensure all profiles (Domain, Private, Public) are checked. 
Click Next, give the rule a name like "Block Telnet Port 23", then click Finish. 

4. Test the Block Rule 
Attempt to connect to port 23 using Telnet from another device or the same PC (telnet 
localhost 23). 
The connection should be refused, confirming the block rule is working. 

5. Add Rule to Allow SSH (Port 22) 
Repeat steps in #3, but use port 22 and select Allow the connection instead of block.  
Alternatively, use Command Prompt as administrator: 
netsh advfirewall firewall add rule name="Allow SSH Port 22" dir=in action=allow 
protocol=TCP localport=22 

6. Remove the Test Block Rule to Restore Original State 
In Inbound Rules, find "Block Telnet Port 23", right-click it, and select Delete. 
Or, from Command Prompt: 
netsh advfirewall firewall delete rule name="Block Telnet Port 23" 



7. Documented Commands/GUI Steps 
All steps above detail the GUI and command-line methods used. 

8. How Windows Firewall Filters Traffic 
Windows Firewall checks inbound and outbound traffic against all active rules. 
For each incoming connection, it checks for a matching rule (such as blocking TCP/23 or 
allowing TCP/22). 
If a rule matches and blocks or allows traffic, the firewall enforces the specified action, 
protecting the system from unauthorized access. Rules can be adjusted as required to 
secure critical services